# 🚉 Metro Station

This project is a Kotlin compiler plugin implemented based on [Metro's extensions API][metro-fir-api]. The goal is to
get rid of KSP usages across our codebase. 

> **⚠️ Please note that Metro's extensions API is highly experimental, as well as the Kotlin compiler plugin API itself.
> You should be aware of the high maintenance cost if you decide to follow the same approach.**

## Performance Benchmark

The benchmark was performed on the BandLab Android app with Gradle Profiler. At the time of benchmarking, 
BandLab Android app has 1163 modules, and 490 of them are running KSP (3 processors in total).

| Mutation         | KSP 🐢 | Metro Station 🚀 | Delta 📉      |
|:-----------------|:-------|:-----------------|:--------------|
| **Root Abi**     | 54.79s | 28.72s           | **-47.57%** ✨ |
| **Root Non-abi** | 40.26s | 17.14s           | **-57.43%** ✨ |

## Use Cases

### @ContributesConfigSelector

This annotation generates a multibinding contribution for config selectors. 

Annotating a class with `@ContributesConfigSelector` will generate a nested `@ContributesTo(AppScope::class)` interface
that binds the annotated class into a `Set<DebuggableConfigSelector>` via `@Binds @IntoSet`.

```kotlin
@ContributesConfigSelector
object MyConfigSelector : BooleanConfigSelector {
    
    // The plugin generates:
    @ContributesTo(AppScope::class)
    interface MultibindingContribution {
        @Binds @IntoSet
        fun bind(impl: MyConfigSelector): DebuggableConfigSelector
    }
}
```

### @MetroStation

This annotation generates a Dependency Graph for the feature.

Annotate your feature with @MetroStation, provide a dependency contract you need from the AppGraph,
and the compiler plugin will generate a standalone dependency graph for you ✨

```kotlin
@MetroStation(appDependencies = [MyPage.ServiceProvider::class])
class MyPage(context: Context) : Page<MyViewModel>(),
  /* generated */ HasServiceProvider {

  interface ServiceProvider {
    val appDependency: AppDependency
  }

  // All code below will be generated by the compiler plugin:
  private val graph: FeatureGraph

  override fun <T> resolve(): T = HasServiceProvider.resolveFrom(graph)

  @IROnlyFactories
  @Page
  @DependencyGraph(
    scope = MyPage::class,
    bindingContainers = [DefaultPageDependencies::class]
  )
  interface FeatureGraph : PageInjector<MyPage> {

    @Provides
    fun provideBaseType(feature: MyPage): Page<*> = feature

    @DependencyGraph.Factory
    interface Factory : PageGraphFactory<MyPage, FeatureServiceProvider, EmptyExtraDependencies, FeatureGraph>
  }

  @ContributesTo(AppScope::class)
  interface FeatureServiceProvider : ServiceProvider, DefaultScreenServiceProvider
}
```
Besides the basic support, we will also generate param providers:
- For CommonActivity, param type T is available in the graph.
- For ParamPage, we will provide both the initial param, and a flow of params that listens to the host activity's onNewIntent.

Supported types: Page, Activity, Fragment, and any other classes

### @StationEntry

This annotation generates a Graph Extension for the feature.

> @StationEntry is in maintenance mode as we're shifting towards graph-per-feature, please use @MetroStation instead.

Annotate your feature with @StationEntry, and the compiler plugin will contribute a graph extension towards
the declared parentScope for you, and contribute the factory to a multibinding to the AppGraph for runtime use.

```kotlin
@StationEntry
class MyPage : Page<MyViewModel>() {

  // All code below will be generated by the compiler plugin:
  @IROnlyFactories
  @MyPageScope
  @GraphExtension(
    scope = MyPage::class,
    bindingContainers = [DefaultPageDependencies::class, FeatureBindings::class]
  )
  interface FeatureExtension : PageInjector<MyPage> {

    @ContributesTo(AppScope::class)
    @GraphExtension.Factory
    interface Factory {
      fun create(@Provides feature: MyPage): FeatureExtension
    }
  }

  @IROnlyFactories
  @BindingContainer
  object FeatureBindings {
    @Provides
    fun provideBaseType(feature: MyPage): Page<*> = feature
  }

  @IROnlyFactories
  @ContributesTo(scope = AppScope::class)
  interface ExtensionFactoryContribution {
    @Provides
    @IntoMap
    @ClassKey(MyPage::class)
    fun provideFactory(factory: FeatureExtension.Factory): Any = factory
  }
}
```

Same as @MetroStation, we will also generate param providers in FeatureBindings if the feature has a param.

Supported types: Page, Activity, Fragment

## Project Structure

This project has four modules:

- The [`:compiler-plugin`](compiler-plugin/src) module contains the compiler plugin itself.
- The [`:plugin-annotations`](plugin-annotations/src/main/kotlin) module contains annotations which can be used in
  user code for interacting with compiler plugin.
- The [`:gradle-plugin`](gradle-plugin/src) module contains a Gradle plugin to add the compiler plugin and
  annotation dependency to a Kotlin project.
- The [`:stubs`](stubs/src) module contains stub classes for testing purposes.

Extension point registration:

- K2 Frontend (FIR) extensions can be registered in `MetroStationPluginRegistrar`.
- All other extensions (including K1 frontend and backend) can be registered in `MetroStationPluginComponentRegistrar`.

There is a sample Android app under [`:sample`](sample) that demonstrates how we use the compiler plugin.

## Tests

The [Kotlin compiler test framework][test-framework] is set up for this project.
To create a new test, add a new `.kt` file in a [compiler-plugin/testData](compiler-plugin/testData) sub-directory:
`testData/box` for codegen tests and `testData/diagnostics` for diagnostics tests.
The generated JUnit 5 test classes will be updated automatically when tests are next run.
They can be manually updated with the `generateTests` Gradle task as well.
To aid in running tests, it is recommended to install the [Kotlin Compiler DevKit][test-plugin] IntelliJ plugin,
which is pre-configured in this repository.

---

License
-------

    Copyright 2026 BandLab Singapore Pte Ltd

    Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
    you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
    You may obtain a copy of the License at
    
    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
    
    Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
    distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
    WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
    See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
    limitations under the License.


[//]: # (Links)

[metro-fir-api]: https://github.com/ZacSweers/metro/blob/main/compiler/API.md
[test-framework]: https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/compiler/test-infrastructure/ReadMe.md
[test-plugin]: https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin-compiler-devkit
